add section on How to interpret an 'and' or an 'or' (#367)
OBOAcademy/obook: docs/explanation/intro-to-ontologies.md

![](../images/discussions/intro-to-ontologies/nose-classification.png)

##### How to interpret an 'and' or an 'or'

> In the case where a class has 'and' in the label, such as MONDO:0017411 'neonatal inflammatory skin and bowel disease', this should be interpreted as someone with this disease has both neonatal inflammatory skin disease and bowel disease at the same time. This class should be classified as a child of 'bowel disease' and 'neonatal inflammatory skin disease'. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many classes, especially in the domains of disease and phenotype, describe combinations of multiple classes - but it is very important to carefully distinguish wether this combination follows "disjunctive" logic ("or") or "conjunctive" logic ("and"). Both mean something entirely different. Usually where a class has 'and' in the label, such as 'neonatal inflammatory skin and bowel disease' (MONDO:0017411), the class follows a conjunctive logic (as expected), and should be interpreted in a way that someone that presents with this disease has both neonatal inflammatory skin disease and bowel disease _at once_. This class should be classified as a child of 'bowel disease' and 'neonatal inflammatory skin disease'.  Note, however, that naming in many ontologies is not consistent with this logic, and you need to be careful to distinguish wether the interpretation is supposed to be conjunctive or disjunctive (i.e. "and" could actually mean "or", which is especially often the case for clinical terminologies).
```

> Having different statements in the SubClass Of means that the instance of the class is a combination of all the SubClass Of statements. For example, if 'neonatal inflammatory skin and bowel disease' is a subclass of 'bowel disease' and 'neonatal inflammatory skin disease', then an individual with this disease has 'bowel disease' and 'neonatal inflammatory skin disease'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having asserted multiple SubClassOf axioms means that an instance of the class is a combination of all the SubClass Of statements (conjunctive interpretation, see above). For example, if 'neonatal inflammatory skin and bowel disease' is a subclass of both 'bowel disease' and 'neonatal inflammatory skin disease', then an individual with this disease has 'bowel disease' and 'neonatal inflammatory skin disease'.
```

<img width="424" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6722114/220412425-3585f922-f1db-4d77-8ee3-48350ff5f55c.png">

> If there were a class called 'neonatal inflammatory skin **or** bowel disease', then it would be interpreted that an individual with this disease has _either_ bowel disease _or_ neonatal inflammatory skin disease _or_ both. It would not be accurate to classify this class as a child of bowel disease and neonatal inflammatory skin disease.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there were a class 'neonatal inflammatory skin **or** bowel disease', the intention is usually that this class follows disjunctive logic. A class following this logic would be interpreted in a way that an individual with this disease has _either_ bowel disease _or_ neonatal inflammatory skin disease _or_ both. It would not be accurate to classify this class as a child of bowel disease and neonatal inflammatory skin disease. This type of class is often called a "grouping class", and is used to aggregate related diseases in a way useful to users, like "disease" and "sequelae of disease".
```
